Testing strategy for Istio module (#1176)
kyma-project/istio: docs/contributor/02-10-testing-strategy.md

> # Testing strategy of the Istio module

Reviewer: I think we should add an additional section describing what we want to test, like the main areas/categories of tests, for example:
- Istio installation and upgrade
- Istio functionalities
- Gateway API, etc.

## Background
The Istio module requires a testing strategy to ensure that the module is always functioning
as expected on all supported platforms.
However, running tests on all supported platforms in all cases is both time-consuming and expensive.
Therefore, we need to decide on a testing strategy that balances the need for comprehensive
testing with the requirement for fast feedback and development.

## Testing strategy outline

The testing strategy for the Istio module will be implemented according to the following guidelines:
1. Tests that depend on the Gardener platform will not run on Pull Requests (PRs).
2. Gardener related tests will run during post-merge workflows and on scheduled runs.
3. If a Gardener-related test fails, the cluster will remain alive for debugging purposes.
4. In the event of a test failure during a post-merge workflow, the PR owner is responsible for resolving the issue.
5. PR tests should generally avoid relying on external resources.

>    This especially means that secrets should not be required for running PR tests whenever possible.

Reviewer: Let's maybe add one sentence more to explain that having secrets and external resources is a security concern as this is an open-source project.

6. Integration tests for PRs will run on a local Kubernetes cluster using the k3d platform.
7. Compatibility, performance, and UI tests will run only on scheduled runs.
8. Tests ensuring release stability and readiness will be triggered during the release workflow.

Additionally, the following naming conventions will be adopted for workflows:
- Workflows that run before merge should be prefixed with `pull`.
- Workflows triggered after merge should be prefixed with `post`.
- Workflows running on schedule should be prefixed with `schedule`.
- Workflows related to release should be prefixed with `release`.
- Workflows that run on manual trigger will be prefixed with `call`.

> ## Rationale

Reviewer: This looks nice already, but I would add even more things:
- how we test different clouds - why we've chosen the AWS and GCP
- image builder vs local build - where we test it and why (in k3d tests it is okay to have local Docker image, but in real kubernetes we need a Docker image in external registry
- how we test releases - last chance to execute tests on the image with official target name

while providing prompt feedback for PRs.
This testing strategy prioritizes comprehensive e2e evaluations during post-merge and release pipeline stages,
while PR-level assessments focus on unit tests and fundamental integration tests.
Testing on Gardener clusters incurs significant computational and time costs.
End-to-end (e2e) Kubernetes scenarios are instead evaluated using k3d where feasible,
due to its reduced initialization time and higher reliability in controlled environments.
The probability of Gardener-specific test failures when k3d-based tests pass is considered low.
In the event of Gardener-related test failures after a PR has been merged,
the responsibility for stabilizing the associated workflows lies with the author of the merged PR.

## Separation of concerns

To achieve the desired testing strategy,
the tests will be separated into three categories,
that are defined as follows:
- `unit tests` that run without any external dependencies, and do not require any pre-existing resources.
- `integration tests` that require external dependencies,
but do not require a full Kubernetes cluster (for example, they might run on controller-runtime `envtest` environment).

> - `e2e tests` that require a full Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: I would even split it into:
- lightweight e2e tests with lightweight kubernetes (k3d) - everything runs in Docker in a local machine, there is no hyperscaler involved yet (no real networking, no load balancer, etc.)
- full e2e tests on a real infrastructure

Reviewer: The above 'pyramid' says about regular/usual functional tests, but I think we should also mention 'special' cases, like:
- UI tests
- performance tests
- upgrade tests
- zero downtime tests
etc.

> # Testing strategy of the Istio module

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Testing Strategy of the Istio Module
```

## Background
The Istio module requires a testing strategy to ensure that the module is always functioning
as expected on all supported platforms.
However, running tests on all supported platforms in all cases is both time-consuming and expensive.

> Therefore, we need to decide on a testing strategy that balances the need for comprehensive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, we've decided on a testing strategy that balances the need for a comprehensive
```

testing with the requirement for fast feedback and development.

## Testing strategy outline

> The testing strategy for the Istio module will be implemented according to the following guidelines:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The testing strategy for the Istio module must be implemented according to the following guidelines:
```

> 1. Tests that depend on the Gardener platform will not run on Pull Requests (PRs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Tests that depend on the Gardener platform do not run on Pull Requests (PRs).
```
If I understand correctly, it's a testing strategy located in the contributor folder (a set of rules that you want to follow and update if needed). So, we can use a present tense

> 2. Gardener related tests will run during post-merge workflows and on scheduled runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Gardener related tests run during post-merge workflows and on scheduled runs.
```

> 3. If a Gardener-related test fails, the cluster will remain alive for debugging purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If a Gardener-related test fails, the cluster remains alive for debugging purposes.
```

4. In the event of a test failure during a post-merge workflow, the PR owner is responsible for resolving the issue.

> 5. PR tests should generally avoid relying on external resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Generally, PR tests should not rely on external resources.
```

   This especially means that secrets should not be required for running PR tests whenever possible.
   This allows for more secure testing and reduces the risk of leaking secrets.

> 6. Integration tests for PRs will run on a local Kubernetes cluster using the k3d platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Integration tests for PRs run on a local Kubernetes cluster using the k3d platform.
```

> 7. Compatibility, performance, and UI tests will run only on scheduled runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Compatibility, performance, and UI tests run only on scheduled runs.
```

> 8. Tests ensuring release stability and readiness will be triggered during the release workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. Tests ensuring release stability and readiness are triggered during the release workflow.
```

9. Generally, we do not want to test the functionality of Istio service mesh itself.

> Additionally, the following naming conventions will be adopted for workflows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the following naming conventions are adopted for workflows:
```

> - Workflows that run before merge should be prefixed with `pull`.
> - Workflows triggered after merge should be prefixed with `post`.
> - Workflows running on schedule should be prefixed with `schedule`.
> - Workflows related to release should be prefixed with `release`.
> - Workflows that run on manual trigger will be prefixed with `call`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Workflows that run before merge should be prefixed with `pull`.
- Workflows triggered after merge should be prefixed with `post`.
- Workflows running on a schedule should be prefixed with `schedule`.
- Workflows related to release should be prefixed with `release`.
- Workflows that run on the manual trigger should be prefixed with `call`.
```

## Rationale

The primary objective is to ensure that the module remains stable and prepared for release,
while providing prompt feedback for PRs.

> This testing strategy prioritizes comprehensive e2e evaluations during post-merge and release pipeline stages,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This testing strategy prioritizes comprehensive end-to-end (e2e) evaluations during post-merge and release pipeline stages,
```

while PR-level assessments focus on unit tests and fundamental integration tests.

Testing on Gardener clusters incurs significant computational and time costs.

> End-to-end (e2e) Kubernetes scenarios are instead evaluated using k3d where feasible,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
E2e (e2e) Kubernetes scenarios are instead evaluated using k3d where feasible,
```

due to its reduced initialization time and higher reliability in controlled environments.
The probability of Gardener-specific test failures when k3d-based tests pass is considered low.
In the event of Gardener-related test failures after a PR has been merged,
the responsibility for stabilizing the associated workflows lies with the author of the merged PR.

As generally the tests do not rely on specific cloud provider configurations,
we perform Gardener-related tests mainly on AWS cloud, 

> as this is the most common cloud provider for BTP Kyma Runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as this is the most common cloud provider for SAP BTP, Kyma runtime.
```

To ensure stability of image building, PRs build their own local image,
with the post-merge workflow using the image-builder image.
As the last point to catch any issues before the release,

> the release workflow will run all tests, including compatibility, performance, and UI tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the release workflow runs all tests, including compatibility, performance, and UI tests.
```

> ## Separation of concerns

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Separation of Concerns
```

To achieve the desired testing strategy,

> the tests will be separated into three categories,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the tests must be separated into three categories,
```

that are defined as follows:
- `unit tests` that run without any external dependencies, and do not require any pre-existing resources.
- `integration tests` that require external dependencies,
but do not require a full Kubernetes cluster (for example, they might run on controller-runtime `envtest` environment).
- `lighweight e2e tests` that require a Kubernetes cluster but can run on a local cluster (k3d).
- `full e2e tests` that require a full production-like Kubernetes cluster (Gardener).

> Additionally, the tests will be separated into the following groups:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the tests must separated into the following groups:
```

- `compatibility tests` that ensure compatibility with Kubernetes versions.
- `performance tests` that ensure the performance of the module.
- `UI tests` that ensure the UI of the module, presented in the Kyma Dashboard is working as expected.
- `upgrade tests` that ensure the module can be upgraded without any issues.
- `zero downtime tests` that ensure the module can be upgraded without any downtime.

## Consequences

> The module will adopt the test run strategy according to the following matrix:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The module adopts the test run strategy according to the following matrix:
```

> | Trigger/Job                                                      | lint | unit tests | integration tests | aws specific | gcp specific | upgrade tests (incl zero downtime Istio bump test) | compatibility test | UI tests | performance tests |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Trigger/Job                                                      | Lint | Unit tests | Integration tests | AWS specific | GCP specific | Upgrade tests (incl zero downtime Istio bump test) | Compatibility test | UI tests | Performance tests |
```

| main (image-builder image)                                       | x    | x          | x (k3d, AWS, GCP) | x            | x            | x (k3d, AWS)                                       |                    |          |                   |
| PR to rel (own image)                                            | x    | x          | x (k3d)           |              |              |                                                    |                    |          |                   |
| schedule (image-builder image)                                   |      |            |                   |              |              |                                                    | x (k3d, AWS)       | x (k3d)  | x (AWS)           |
| release (create release workflow) (image-builder image prod art) | x    | x          | x (k3d, AWS, GCP) | x            | x            | x (k3d, AWS)                                       |                    |          |                   |

> Tests will also be renamed to align with the adopted naming conventions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tests' must be renamed to align with the adopted naming conventions.
```
